An introduction to the Dear ImGui library (#75)
conan-io/conan-io.github.io: _posts/2019-06-26-An-introduction-to-the-Dear-ImGui-library.markdown

---
layout: post
comments: false
title: "An introduction to the Dear ImGui library"
---

> As developers, we all have faced the pain of introducing graphical interfaces to our programs. Traditional GUI libraries add a degree of complexity which you may not want if you are making tools that are intended for debugging. Here we present a library that makes it possible to create [loggers](https://github.com/ocornut/imgui/issues/2529), [profilers](https://github.com/ocornut/imgui/issues/2265), [debuggers](https://github.com/ocornut/imgui/issues/2265) or even an [entire game making editor](https://github.com/ocornut/imgui/issues/1607) quick and easy. The entire [example](https://github.com/czoido/dear-imgui-conan-example) presented here is available on [Github](https://github.com/czoido/dear-imgui-conan-example).

Reviewer: Please use more than one line for paragraphs (normally we use 140 chars line length) and remove the repeated link to https://github.com/czoido/dear-imgui-conan-example

> As developers, we all have faced the pain of introducing graphical interfaces to our programs. Traditional GUI libraries add a degree of complexity which you may not want if you are making tools that are intended for debugging. Here we present a library that makes it possible to create [loggers](https://github.com/ocornut/imgui/issues/2529), [profilers](https://github.com/ocornut/imgui/issues/2265), [debuggers](https://github.com/ocornut/imgui/issues/2265) or even an [entire game making editor](https://github.com/ocornut/imgui/issues/1607) quick and easy. The entire [example](https://github.com/czoido/dear-imgui-conan-example) presented here is available on [Github](https://github.com/czoido/dear-imgui-conan-example).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As developers, we all have faced the pain of introducing graphical interfaces to our programs. Traditional GUI libraries add a degree of complexity which you may not want if you are making tools that are intended for debugging. Here we present a library that makes it possible to create [loggers](https://github.com/ocornut/imgui/issues/2529), [profilers](https://github.com/ocornut/imgui/issues/2265), [debuggers](https://github.com/ocornut/imgui/issues/2265) or even an [entire game making editor](https://github.com/ocornut/imgui/issues/1607) quickly and easily. The entire [example](https://github.com/czoido/dear-imgui-conan-example) presented here is available on [Github](https://github.com/czoido/dear-imgui-conan-example).
```

### Dear ImGui?

> [Dear ImGui](https://github.com/ocornut/imgui) is an amazing C++ GUI library which focuses on simplicity and productivity using what is called [Inmediate Mode GUI paradigm](https://caseymuratori.com/blog_0001). 

Reviewer: I think it is worth to comment that the library has MIT license, so people know it can be used in their projects without any other restrictions/implications

Immediate mode GUI's are different from the traditional retained-mode interfaces in that widgets are created and drawn on each frame vs the traditional approach of first creating a widget and adding callbacks to it. Some of the benefits of this paradigm are your UI "lives closer" to your data and that it allows for fast prototyping.

> Dear ImGui is mainly designed for developers to use in content creation and debug tools. It's renderer agnostic in the way that you have to provide the tools to render the data but It's very easy to integrate into your own code as it has multiple bindings for different platforms (like [GLFW](https://www.glfw.org/), [SDL2](https://www.libsdl.org/index.php) and GLUT) and multiple renderers (like OpenGL, DirectX and [Vulkan](https://www.khronos.org/vulkan/)).

Reviewer 2: GLFW, SDL2, GLUT aren't platforms, probably better to say `graphic libraries` or something else

Dear ImGui comes with lots of widgets like windows, labels, input boxes, progress bars, buttons, sliders, trees, etc. You can see some examples in the image beneath.

<p class="centered">
    <img  src="{{ site.url }}/assets/post_images/2019-06-26/conan-imgui-widgets.gif"  align="center"  alt="Different Dear ImGui widgets"/>
</p>

### Integrating Dear ImGui in your application

The typical use of ImGui is when you already have a 3D-pipeline enabled application like a content creation or game development tool where you want to add a GUI. Let's see how easy it is to integrate ImGui in our application. Our example application renders a triangle using OpenGL3. We will use GLFW to manage window creation and events handling. As ImGui is independent of the rendering system and platform we have to introduce some binding for our rendering system. Fortunately, there are many premade bindings in Dear ImGui's repo. As we will use Dear ImGui v1.69 these are the ones we will need:

> * [imgui_impl_opengl3.cpp](https://github.com/ocornut/imgui/blob/v1.69/examples/imgui_impl_opengl3.cpp)

Reviewer: I understand this is the canonical way to use this library but, do you really have to copy these files to use the library with Conan?

Maybe this is something we should explore and see if Conan can improve the way of "importing" these files

Author: Thanks a lot, I didn't took into account that the binding were being exported with the recipe. So I'll modify the conanfile.txt to import those files instead of downloading them.

static float rotation = 0.0;
ImGui::SliderFloat("rotation", &rotation, 0, 2 * PI);
static float translation[] = {0.0, 0.0};
ImGui::SliderFloat2("position", translation, -1.0, 1.0);
static float color[4] = { 1.0f,1.0f,1.0f,1.0f };
// pass the parameters to the shader
triangle_shader.setUniform("rotation", rotation);
triangle_shader.setUniform("translation", translation[0], translation[1]);
// color picker
ImGui::ColorEdit3("color", color);
// multiply triangle's color with this color
triangle_shader.setUniform("color", color[0], color[1], color[2]);
{% endhighlight %}

<p class="centered">
    <img  src="{{ site.url }}/assets/post_images/2019-06-26/conan-imgui-triangle-rotate-color.gif" align="center" alt="Change triangle's color"/>
</p>

There are some basic drawing tools as well.

<p class="centered">
    <img  src="{{ site.url }}/assets/post_images/2019-06-26/conan-imgui-logo.png" align="center" alt="Render Conan logo"/>
</p>

If you want to explore the different library widgets and options the best way to do it is to make a call to ``ImGui::ShowDemoWindow()`` and have a look at the different examples.

### Setting up a project with Conan

> Setting up a project that uses ImGui is a matter of minutes with Conan. The example shown here is using Windows and Visual Studio 2017 but it is very similar in [MacOS or Linux](https://github.com/czoido/dear-imgui-conan-example/blob/master/README.md).

Reviewer 3: You need to move your example to conan-io/example

First, let's make the CMake project. It has the bindings for GLFW and OpenGL3 and two more files to handle OpenGL shaders and file reading. It will also copy the shaders that render the triangle to the working directory each time the application is recompiled.

{% highlight cmake %}
cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 2.8.12)
project(dear-imgui-conan)

include(${CMAKE_BINARY_DIR}/conanbuildinfo_multi.cmake)
conan_basic_setup()

add_executable( dear-imgui-conan 
                main.cpp 
                imgui_impl_glfw.cpp
                imgui_impl_opengl3.cpp
                opengl_shader.cpp
                file_manager.cpp
                imgui_impl_glfw.h
                imgui_impl_opengl3.h 
                opengl_shader.h 
                file_manager.h 
                assets/simple-shader.vs
                assets/simple-shader.fs )

add_custom_command(TARGET dear-imgui-conan
    POST_BUILD
    COMMAND ${CMAKE_COMMAND} -E copy ${PROJECT_SOURCE_DIR}/assets/simple-shader.vs ${PROJECT_BINARY_DIR}
    COMMAND ${CMAKE_COMMAND} -E copy ${PROJECT_SOURCE_DIR}/assets/simple-shader.fs ${PROJECT_BINARY_DIR}
)

conan_target_link_libraries(dear-imgui-conan)
{% endhighlight %}

> We will also need the Conan file to declare the libraries it depends on. Besides from the GLFW library we already talked about we need the GLEW library to handle OpenGL functions loading. We will use cmake_multi to generate projects for Debug and Release configurations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will also need the *conanfile* to declare the libraries it depends on. Besides from the GLFW library we already talked about we need the GLEW library to handle OpenGL functions loading. We will use ``cmake_multi`` to generate projects for Debug and Release configurations.
```

{% highlight text %}
[requires]
imgui/1.69@bincrafters/stable
glfw/3.2.1@bincrafters/stable
glew/2.1.0@bincrafters/stable

[generators]
cmake_multi
{% endhighlight %}

Now let's build the project and run the application.

{% highlight bash %}
mkdir build
cd build
conan install .. -s build_type=Release
conan install .. -s build_type=Debug
cmake .. -DCMAKE_CONFIGURATION_TYPES=Debug;Release -G "Visual Studio 15 Win64"
cmake --build . --config Release
cd Release
dear-imgui-conan
{% endhighlight %}

### Conclusions

> Dear ImGui is a powerful library with an easy to use API which integrates into 3D-pipeline enable applications almost seamlessly. It has lots of widgets and can be a great tool to make debugging software such as profilers, loggers or object editors of any kind. Also, new functionalities like [docking](https://github.com/ocornut/imgui/issues/2109) or [multiple viewports](https://github.com/ocornut/imgui/issues/1542) are currently being developed. Now it's time to experiment with the library and making it interact with your own code!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Dear ImGui is a powerful library with an easy to use API which integrates into 3D-pipeline enabled applications almost seamlessly. It has lots of widgets and can be a great tool to make debugging software such as profilers, loggers or object editors of any kind. Also, new functionalities like [docking](https://github.com/ocornut/imgui/issues/2109) or [multiple viewports](https://github.com/ocornut/imgui/issues/1542) are currently being developed. Now it's time to experiment with the library and making it interact with your own code!
```
